A number of years ago I adopted the full ADSLC standard for station nomenclature in the format of my arrival time data files and also in the master station file, but until now MLOC only processed the traditional station code. To a large extent that was because there has never seemed to be much progress in assigning agency and deployment codes in seismological bulletins, including the ISC Bulletin. I’ve had periodic conversations with Dave Ketchum about this and gradually accepted that the vision of the original 2013 document on your website may never be realized.

In the meantime, the NEIC ComCat system seems to be firmly standardized on the use of FDSN network codes to provide an extra dimension of identification for station codes. I often collaborate with those guys and so I have had many headaches caused by the appearance of data from US regional networks that have not bothered to register their station codes with the ISC. The frequent conflicts that arise with IR-registered stations have finally driven me to start using network codes (deployment codes in the ADSLC formulation) in MLOC.

 My master station file is restricted to stations that are registered with the IR, but each entry has fields for the agency, deployment and location from the ADSLC standard. Filling in all those fields (20,000+ entries) would be a horrendous job in any case, but especially since there does not yet seem to be an agreed agency and deployment for each of them. I have filled in some of them, such as US Transportable Array stations, and some Iranian stations, but most entries are blank. Therefore I have fallen back to an umbrella policy that appears to me to be legitimate: when I access the master station file in MLOC, the agency for each station is taken “ISC” and the deployment is “IR”.
 
In reality, the agency code is irrelevant in this discussion because it is not (so far) needed to resolve station conflicts. The deployment (or network) code is sufficient for that purpose. 

That umbrella policy for the master station file is nearly mandatory in MLOC because the vast majority of data I work with is simply “ISC data” that has never had an assignment of agency and deployment (or network code). Therefore the agency and deployment fields in the MNF files are generally blank. In that case MLOC says 'Since I don't know the deployment code for this station I cannot use the deployment code from the master station file (or any supplemental station files) either', and the assignment of coordinates to a station code happens exactly as before.

If a reading in an MNF file does have a non-blank deployment code, however, MLOC will require that both the station code and the deployment code match in the station list that is composed of any supplemental station files plus the master station file. This is why it is almost mandatory that the entries from the master station file be given a predictable deployment code inside MLOC. The ADSLC standard supports a bewildering set of aliases to support various administrative requirements but this means that any given station can have many different agency and deployment codes. If these were carried into MLOC it would be necessary to ensure that the MNF data files used whatever deployment code had been used in the master station file. Defaulting to "IR" inside MLOC makes this all much easier.

Another reason for 